# MA346_FINAL Project Report
Link to Project Dashboard: https://3e26a618-2b04-4fc1-acaa-7721d2c25fee.deepnoteproject.com/

Analysis of MLB Regular Season Team Statistics

The purpose of the Deepnote Project is to build a model that determines which team-wide statistics are efficient at predicting an MLB team’s winning percentage in a single regular season. Data for this model prediction was collected from MLB.com and focused primarily on regular-season hitting and pitching statistics for all 30 MLB teams from the 2016 to 2021 seasons. However, team statistics from the 2020 MLB Season were excluded from the data analysis due to Covid-19 restrictions that limited the number of regular-season games. In order to conduct a linear regression model for predicting a team’s win percentage in a single regular season, that data set was split into two subsets, in which 70% of the data was used to build the model (training dataset), and 30% was used to test the model’s effectiveness (testing model). 

The first step in conducting a linear regression model to predict a team’s win percentage was to determine the independent and dependent variables. In our first efforts to build the regression model, the independent variables were set to include all of the variables from the dataset (see Appendix A) except for Team, League, and Win Percentage, and the dependent variable was set to include the team’s win percentage. After conducting the initial linear regression model and analyzing the adjusted R-squared value and the variance inflation factor values for the variables (see Appendix B), it was apparent that the model would not be efficient at predicting a team’s win percentage due to multicollinearity. Multicollinearity reduces the precision of the estimated coefficients, which weakens the statistical power of the regression model. 

In order to build a linear regression model that was a better fit for predicting a team’s win percentage in a single regular season, a backward step procedure was conducted, in which one variable at a time would be removed from the list of the independent variables. In order to determine which independent variables to remove from the model, an analysis of the variances inflation factors of the variables and their correlation to one another was conducted (see Appendix C). The variable with the highest variance inflation factor and correlation to other independent variables was removed from the model and the linear regression model was conducted again based on the new set of independent variables. This procedure was repeated until all independent variables included demonstrated low correlation to one another and consistently produced variance inflation factors below a value of 10. The purpose of using a model in which all independent variables have a variance inflation factor below 10, is that by statistical standards, a VIF value greater than 10 indicates a high correlation and is a concern in regard to building predictive models.

After performing the backward step procedure, the independent variables that are included to predict a team’s win percentage were AB, 2BH, 3BH, HRH, BBH, SOH, SBH, CSH, OBPH, SVO, SHO, H, CG, HB, BB, and SO (see Appendix D). The coefficients of the desired independent variables were then used to construct a linear equation that would be used in order to estimate the team’s win percentage. In order to determine if the model was effective at predicting a team’s win percentage, we used the data from the testing dataset and calculated the predicted win percentage for the team using our linear equation. The predicted win percentages were then compared to the team’s actual win percentage and the RMSE (Root Mean Standard Error) was calculated in order to evaluate how accurate our predictions were and the deviation from the actual value. In regards to linear regression, a lower RMSE value indicates a better fit model for predicting the desired dependent variable (see Appendix E). In conclusion to building the model, we were able to determine that the model was efficient at predicting a team’s win percentage based on low VIF values, a high adjusted R-squared value, a low RMSE value, and that the linear regression assumptions of independence, normality, homoscedasticity, and linearity, were met (see Appendix F). (*Note: A better model for predicting a team’s win percentage could be derived with further analysis of statistics, this model does not serve as the “best” model universally for predicting a team’s win percentage.)

The derived model for predicting a team’s win percentage in a single regular season is beneficial for both MLB coaches and organizations, current and aspiring MLB players, and individuals invested in sports gambling.  MLB coaches and organizations can use the model in order to determine which aspects of the game they should structure practices around in order to produce a more favorable win percentage during the regular season, thus increasing their team’s chances of making an appearance in the playoffs. Current and aspiring MLB players can use the model in order to determine which aspects of the game lead to a higher win percentage and structure their training to excel in those aspects and appear to be more valuable to organizations. Lastly, individuals in sports gambling can use the model to make more efficient financial decisions regarding predicting a team to win a game. 
